---
layout: post
title: Review of Camara's Electrical and Electronics Reference Manual
comments: true
permalink: PE_Prep
---

*I recently decided to reinvigorate my career by getting a PE license. I could get by without it, but my home state (Maryland) has updated legislation on enforcing licensing for most engineering activities. Also, I've thought about doing this on and off since I got my BS, so now I don't have to think about it any more. I found Camara's book to be extremely valuable to my preparations, but felt the number of errors was unacceptable. The publisher created a nice path for getting the corrections in, but it appears Camara himself refused to acknowledge most of my findings. It is extremely disappointing that Camara does not feel these issues (some fairly egregious) are worthy of direct discourse. While the publisher did include the errata for about 15% of the errors I found (all entries for 4/20/2015 are mine) I feel that posting the remaining errors here could help some PE candidates avoid costly errors and decrease the amount of time needed to understand the concepts.*

##The following is provided for fuel for discussions: I acknowledge that my analysis below may contain errors. I've included fairly complete explanations where that is applicable, but I make no claims as to whether I'm correct. Make your own decisions!

##Reference Manual Non-Published Errors:

Chapt 15 pg 14: Fig. 15.9: Drawn as sawtooth, but used like sine wave

Chapt 15 pg 15: Fig. 15.10 and accompanying text. 15.10c is incorrect. The Fourier transform of a n impulse is a constant value of 1 for all frequencies. The figure shows an impulse in the frequency domain.

Chapt 16 pg 7: Ex. 16.5: Lefthand column at bottom. Incorrect sign for “58.7”. Then the sign of the “58.7” magnitude was reversed during succeeding calculations, so this was just a typo.

Chapt 16 pg 17: Eq. 16.60. No derivation and doesn't  match table 16.8 (see probs with Eq 22.4 below, which is the same equation, although with different applicability noted). I suggest just crossing it out as unnecessary and incorrect information: While flux density is a useful concept, “total flux” isn't a great concept outside of a magnetic pole. The problem with fields due to conductors is that the flux density has no limit as r goes to zero.

Chapt 16 pg 18:	Section 27: Recommend adding the word “net” in front of “amount of flux”. (obviously, flux can pass through the closed surface)

Chapt 16 pg 20:	left column of text. Last paragraph. Should be “external force” NOT “external magnetic force”

Chapt 17 pg 4: Eq. 17.11: missing factor of 1/(2pi)

Chapt 18 pg 4: Ex. 18.3: Incorrectly mixes radians/sec and cycles/sec. Referenced Eq 18.4 isn't used properly! Proposed answer makes no sense.

Chapt 21 pg 2: Ex. 21.1:  Neglected to multiply by Avogadro's number. (The dipole moment calculated is per molecule, not per mole!)

Chapt 22 pg 1: Eq. 22.1 missing limits of applicability: This is only valid in the plane orthogonal to the segment which is intersecting the center of the segment. For other points use Eq. 22.6

Chapt 22 pg 2: Eq. 22.4: Introduced with no reference and provides no limits on applicability. This actually comes from Eq. 16.60 where it also just “pops up”. The same formula is in Fink's Electronics Engineers' Handbook (Sec. 1.6.8), but Camara has added the “=BA” addition onto it, making it even more confusing since we don't know what area is being referred to. Fink doesn't adequately explain the applicability of this equation either. Camara in Eq. 16.60 says the applicability is for loops, while Fink and Camara in Eq. 22.4 suggest it's for straight conductors. Camara's loop interpretation of Eq. 16.60 is particularly troubling since the field intensity is obviously not perfectly uniform within the loop. If it really is the total flux, then we could calculate an average field intensity over the area of the loop, and compare that to the field in the center of the loop, which should be the peak field. Performing that algebra yields the  average H=2NI/r which is 4 times larger than the field in the center of the loop as listed in Table 16.8.

Chapt 22 pg 3: Section 22.1: The reference should be to 16.22 not 16.5

Chapt 22 pg 8: Part 4: First sentence reference should be Chapt 20 Part 2 not Section 20.3

Chapt 28 pg 2: Right column, at top: Applying KVL to the circuits in the figures does not result in the listed equation 28.8. (So this equation is wrong!)

Chapt 28 pg 3:	Section 3: First Bullet is incorrect. For ideal transformer, with definitions as given in Chapt. 28 Section 2, abs(M) = Ns/Np x Lp = Np/Ns x Ls, or Ns^2/Np^2 = Lp/Ls

Chapt 28 pg 4: Eq. 28.14 is inconsistent with Eq. 28.15: It appears the definition of “Zp” changes between these two. One is impedance within the primary and the other is the transformed impedance from the secondary.

Chapt 28 pg 5: Section 5: The symbology has changed subtly from that introduced previously, which is a great way to cause confusion. For instance, Equation 28.9 will be wrong if the Xp and Xs definitions of this section are used. I believe Camara actually confounded himself with this issue by using Eq 28.20 on pg 28-6, which is correct with the definitions presented in Section 28.1 but wrong with the section 5 definitions.

Chapt 29 pg 6: Eq. 29.19 and Eq 29.20: Missing number of turns! See most any other reference!

Chapt 30 pg 9: Eq. 30.27, needs to be “1 minus” beneath the square root symbol (which will cause it to match Eq 30.18)

Chapt 31 pg 7: Ex. 31.9 should be clarified by changing the wording “0.020 s apart” to “with a 0.020 s separation”

Chapt 31 pg 9: “Step 3”: Suggests writing form of solution before finding the roots of the characteristic equation. Change step order.

Chapt 32 pg 3: Ex. 32.3 “sqrt(30 Np/s)” should be “sqrt(30)Np/s”

Chapt 36 pg 7: Fig. 36.7 “compensating winding” pointing to wrong winding—should go to one marked “C”

Chapt 37 pg 3: Right column of text, near top. “The concentration of acceptor atoms is Na, each contributing one NEGATIVE charge to the lattice.” (text presently has POSITIVE). An acceptor can be viewed as contributing a hole as a carrier, so the hole is “mobile” and the resulting lattice which the hole leaves behind is left with a negative bias. So footnote 7 is a bit mis-construed: The neutrality is a result of no net ions being implanted, just neutral atoms.

Chapt 37 pg 12: Eq. 37.22: “Vd+Vr” should be “Vd-Vr”

Chapt 38 pg 4: Eq. 38.8 is a correction of Eq. 38.4 on the previous page with no comment on applicability

Chapt 38 pg 7: Eq. 38.21 should NOT have a “1/2” factor on it.

Chapt 40 pg 8:	Eq. 40.11 : Clarify by placing “Vnoise,rms” in parentheses prior to squaring. Change accompanying text to match by simply saying “mean square of the noise voltage”

Chapt 40 pg 12: Ex. 40.8: The 2 lines starting with “Vout+0.7” are too hard to understand in the context of the algebra being done. Just ignore them.

Chapt 40 pg 13: Last sentence in left column “the value of Rs selected should be as small...” should read “the value of Rs should be as large....”

Chapt 40 pg 13: Eq. 40.21: add additional term “-(min load current)”

Chapt 40 pg 13: Eq. 40.27: Simplifies to “(Vin,max – Vzm)/(Rs+Rz)”, but would be even more useful as “(Vin,max-Vzm-(min load current)Rs)/Rs+Rz)”

Chapt 40 pg 14: Steps 1 & 2 refer to Eq. 40.20. Should referenced Eq 40.21

Chapt 40 pg 15: Eq. 40.29: add term: “Rs(min load current squared)”

Chapt 40 pg 25: Left column of text. Wrote “Iebo” when “Icbo” was called for twice.

Chapt 44 pg 4: Fig. 44.6: Needs additional note on sub-figure “c” that the R connecting to the following stage has  been incorporated, not just sub-parts “a” and “b”

Chapt 44 pg 7: Eq. 44.9: t2 is defined as the time between t1 and the end of conversion (see fig 44.11b), so 44.9 SHOULD read Va=abs(Vref) x t2/t1

Chapt 45 pg 2: Right column of text, midway down. “The positive x direction is the direction of power flow...” This is correct in the context of the current equation, but when Camara changes x to l (going from Equations 45.7 and 45.8 to Equations 45.9 and 45.10), he doesn't make clear that x=-l and that “l” is never negative. If you don't clarify this, you risk going the wrong way around the Smith Chart/incorrect use of Equation 45.17. See  http://www.antenna-theory.com/tutorial/txline/transmission4.php for a good tutorial.

Chapt 46 pg1-2: Need to define “R” and “G” before using them. R is the resistance within the line leading to attenuation, and that G is the admittance representing insulation leakage.

Chapt 46 pg 6: Eq. 46.20, 46.22, 46.23 should have W, not W/msquared

Chapt 46 pg 6: A more careful review of the definition of “isotropic” would be helpful. The common term used is “EIRP” Effective Isotropic Radiated Power, which is the PEAK (not isotropic) field strength in the antenna radiating pattern. Dropping the adjective “effective” confuses the student.

Chapt 46 pg 8: Eq. 46.42 missing a level of parentheses, which clarifies what the sine is operation on (the product of beta and (h+z)).

Chapt 48 pg1-2: text describing Fig 48.1 says “low pass”, but the spectrum shown doesn't have that kind of characteristic

Chapt 48 pg 6: Section 13, last paragraph. The description of AMI is poor. AMI is a TRI-Level baseband format where zero is indicated by mid-level and ones result in either positive or negative deviations for a single bit time: If the previous one resulted in a positive deviation, the next one will cause a negative deviation.

Chapt 48 pg 7: Footnote 11: Should read “S for 'space'” (not “set”)

Chapt 48 pg 7: Section 16: Should read “constellation of possible values for 4-LEVEL” not “4-bit”

Chapt 48 pg 8: Fig. 48.7: (a) should say “4-LEVEL” not “4-bit”

Chapt 50 pg 3: Section 7: “OFDM” is NOT associated with Optics. 

Chapt 51 pg 11: Left column of text, about midway down. Should reference Eq 51.2, not 51.11

##Additional Errata for Practice Problems

Chapt 18 prob 3: Followed example 18.3 in the Reference Manual exactly, which is an incorrect use of Eq 18.4: uses Hz where it is supposed to use rad/sec

Chapt 22 prob 2: There is actually not enough information available to solve this problem. It appears to be based on the erroneous use of Eq. 22.4 from the Reference Manual. As shown in Section 16-32, you can't get the flux without knowing the magnetic path length!

Chapt 23 prob 4: Total misapplication of stated formula (Formula from Table 16.8, solenoid). A reasonable estimate would be to use Table 16.8 for a single turn, but that would be to the center of the earth. However, published solutions are available which give the magnetic field strength on the axis of the loop, but out of the plane of the loop. Using these solutions, a reasonable answer could be contrived IF we could attach a real distance to “far”. The inconsistency of use of the solenoid equation is very distressing: The equation is clearly valid for the field strength inside of a “long” solenoid, and Camara appears to claim it is the field strength OUTSIDE of a compact loop—and not just at a single point, but anywhere “far” from the earth's surface!

Chapt 28 prob 4: Missing information: Ns=1 turn

Chapt 29 prob 5: Uses eq 29.19 from the Reference Manual, which is incorrect because it doesn't list the number of turns.

Chapt 38, prob 3: Solution incorrectly mixes small signal analysis with bias analysis while doing KVL

Chapt 43 prob 12: As presently written, the problem statement indicates there is no state where A=1 AND B=1, yet the solution requires it.

Chapt 44 prob 7: Error in form of solution: In 1msec, the counter must go through TWO full counts because of the way this kind of converter works (as carefully explained in the Reference Manual). Also, since reference is 5V, accuracy is 0.5 x 5Volts/Full Count, not 0.5 x 10Volts/Full Count

Chapt 48 prob 12: Assumes that if a symbol is in error, only 1 bit will be affected. This is not the case with 4-level PAM: All bits linked to that symbol will be bad if the symbol is bad.

Chapt 51 prob 6: section b: Sensitivity to what?
